---
type: post120
title:  Product structure
categories: XAP120NET, PRM
parent: installation-overview.html
weight: 300
---

The default product location is **C:\GigaSpaces\XAP.NET \{Version\} \{Platform\}** (For example: C:\GigaSpaces\XAP.NET 10.0.0 x64). This convention supports side-by-side installation of different versions and platforms (x86, x64) of XAP.NET.

The product directory structure as follows:

- **NET v4.0** -- Contains XAP.NET for .NET 4.0 (or later)
    - **Bin** -- Contains binaries (Executables and dll files) of the product.
        - **GigaSpaces.Core.dll** -- Main XAP.NET library. All XAP.NET applications reference this assembly.
        - **Gs-Agent.exe** - Starts a local [Service Grid Agent]({{%currentadmurl%}}/the-runtime-environment.html).
        - **Gs-cli.exe** -- Command Line Interface for XAP administration.
        - **Gs-webui.exe** -- [Web Management Console]({{%currentadmurl%}}/web-management-console.html).
        - **Gs-ui.exe** -- Standalone [Management Center]({{%currentadmurl%}}/gigaspaces-management-center.html).
        - **ServicesManager.exe** - [GigaSpaces Services Manager](./gigaspaces-services-manager.html).
    - **Config** -- Contains configuration files.
        - **Settings.xml** - Main product settings file.
    - **Deploy** -- Default location of Processing Units for Service Grid.
    - **Docs** -- Contains offline API documentation.
    - **Examples** -- Contains examples demonstrating usage and features of the product.
    - **Logs** -- Contains log files generated at runtime (created automatically on first usage).
    - **Practices** -- Contains the product practices.
    - **Work** -- Contains temporary files generated by the service grid at runtime (created automatically on first usage).

- **NET v3.5** -- Contains XAP.NET for .NET 3.5 (Optional, needs to be explicitly included during installation). 
- **Runtime** -- Contains the Java part of the product as well as an embedded Java installation.

In addition, the XAP.NET installer creates shortcuts in the start menu for some of these items.
