---
type: post120
title:  Space Object ID
categories: XAP120NET, PRM
parent: modeling-your-data.html
weight: 100
---

{{% ssummary %}} {{% /ssummary %}}

# How Space Object ID is Generated?

You can insert an object into the space using the `Write()` and `WriteMultiple()` methods. When a new object is inserted into the space, it embeds a unique ID - called the UID. The UID can be generated explicitly by the client using a unique value generated by the application business logic or using a sequencer running within the space.

The space UID for space object can be created in three different ways:

- When a space object has no `SpaceId` property declared, the space generates a UID for the object.
- When a space object has a property which is declared as `SpaceId` and marked as `auto-generate=false`, the UID is generated based on the value of the ID field the user is setting.
- When a space object has a property which is declared as `SpaceId` and marked as `auto-generate=true`, the UID is generated by the space and placed back into the field using the relevant setter method. In this case, the field must be a `String` type.




# The SpaceId Field content

- When a space Class has no `SpaceId` property declared, it will be returned without any ID. This means that **update operations cannot be executed** on the space Class. Only the `Read()` and `Write()` methods can be executed.
- When a space Class has a property which is declared as `SpaceId` and `auto-generate=true` and its value is `null`, the `SpaceId` field will store the ID.
- When a space Class has a property which is declared as `SpaceId` and `auto-generate=true` and its value is not null, the `SpaceId` field will store the original value stored within the `SpaceId` field.
- When a space Class has a property which is declared as `SpaceId` and `auto-generate=false`, the `SpaceId` field will store the original value stored within the `SpaceId` field used to generate the UID.

